Library of Congress Catalo*lng-in-Publicatlon Data 
Library
Kump. Peter Breakthrough rapid reading/by Peter Kump. —Rev p. cm. Includes index. ISBN 1-4406-6527-3 1. Speed reading. I. Title. LB 1050.54 K85 1998 98 30376 428/43—de21 CIP O Penguin Putnam Inc. Prentice Halt1 is a registered trademark of Pearson Education. Inc. All rights reserved No pan of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means, uvhout
permission in writing from the publisher The author withes to thank the following publisher* for granting permission to reprint escerpts from copyrighted materials indicated bekyw; From Plants Are Like People by Jerry Baker Reprinted by permission of Nash Publishing Corporation From The Copper Kin*s of Montana by Marian T. Pbcc Reprinted by peraiivtion of Random House. Inc. From You. Inc. by Peter Weaver. Reprinted by permmion
of DoebScday Ac Company. From Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine. Revived Eighth Edition, by Wmtrobe et at. Used by permission of McGraw-Hill Book Company From The Ho-*1 and Why Wonder Hook of Weather by George Bonn 11 lived by permission of Grosset Si Dun lap. Inc. From Man and the Lining World by Karl Vbn Fritch Reprinted by permivsion of Harcoert Brace iovanovich. Inc From lx*n%ua£e in Thought and Action. Third Edition, 
by SI Hayakawa Reprinted by permission of Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. Inc. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the uibject matter covered It is void with the understanding that the publisher iv not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, oc other professional service. If legal advice or other e*pert assistance is required, the service* of a competent professional person vhould be sought —from a Declaration of Principles jomils adopted by a Committee of the American Bar Association and a Committee of Publishers and Associations. 
ATTENTION: CORPORATIONS AND SCHOOLS Prentice Hall books arc available at tjujnuty divcounu with Uilk purchase foe educational, bwviness. or sales promotional ote For information, pieatve write to: Penguin Putnam In;. 375 Hudson Street. New York. New York 10014 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Thanks first and foremost to all of my students from whom I've learned so much ... to Thurston Smith, my teacher, who got me so very excited about the course ... to Dr. Harry Wachs who gave me the first opportunity to teach rapid reading and develop my own techniques ... to Pat Cafferata who gave the first sensible answers to many of my questions ... to George Webster who hired me to open the Pittsburgh Reading Dynamics Institute ... to Adcle Rosenstein. my first "trainer" ... to Karen Riedel who assisted me in developing new ideas and techniques ... to Connie Fisher for her supportive advice ... to the teachers of the Pittsburgh and New York Institutes who so ably put up with my experiments ... to Chip Chapin who gave me many opportunities to expand ... to Dan Theodocion who selected me to teach the White House Staff... to Lori Mammcn, my able companion at the New York Institute ... to Charles Durakis who gave me an opportunity to work much more closely with Evelyn Wood ... to Martha White. Vicki Morgan, and Charlotte "Speaking" Taucz who endlessly typed so many of the books and manuals ... to Gcorgic Reynolds who typed and assisted and continued on even after she took another job in despair to Mary Gussman who collaborated with me on making the training films and writing one of the course manuals . . . to Verla Nielsen, who offered such good support in Salt Lake City . . . and to the many friends at Reading Dynamics including Judy Loughman, Marianne Hayes. Bob Boles, Pat Lynch, Hilda Takeyama. Bernie Kelly. Max Cohen. John Kilgo, Art Kramer, Lou Kohn. Doug Hall. Revetta Young, Lockwood Smith. Margaret Walsh, and many, many more including the hundreds of teachers 1 worked with and trained over the years. Special thanks with work on this book goes to Jo Guuadauro who has assisted me for many different years in many different projects, to David Ross for his invaluable counsel, to my parents who made Schloss Matzen available, where most of this book was peacefully written, also to Denny Modiglian, Arthur Abelman, Margaret Paull, and Janet Cohn. Illustrations are by Carlos Madrid. 
iv 
WHAT BREAKTHROUGH RAPID READING MEANS TO You LEARN TO READ MORE THAN 3 TIMES FASTER WITH BETTER UNDERSTANDING, MORE RETENTION AND IMPROVED RECALL—AT HOME—IN ONLY 6 SHORT WEEKS 
Us not difficult to jog a mile in eight minutes, yet the worlds fastest miler can barely do it in half that time. If you watch a champion swim a 100-meter race you can easily see that he can't swim twice as fast as you can—if you can swim even reasonably well. Yet there are people who can read three, five, even ten times faster than you can. In fact, as long as there have been books printed, there have been a few people—a very select, small percentage—who could read at incredible rates, going through books at a breakneck pace. Maybe you've heard that John F Kennedy was one of these rapid readers. Theodore Roosevelt used to read a book a day. before breakfast, while he occupied the White House. Oliver Wendell Holmes could glance at pages while walking to the Supreme Court and then answer questions about the material in great detail. These are just some of the better-known rapid readers. There have also been many ordinary citizens who can breeze through books and magazines as well 
THE RAPID READING BREAKTHROUGHS 
It wasn't until the 1940s when the first major breakthrough in rapid reading was made. A Salt Lake City school teacher discovered how to turn average readers into super-fast readers. Since then, thousands of people have successfully learned to at least triple their reading speeds and improve their comprehension skills. But this could only be taught in a classroom, and the students had to pay hundreds of dollars for this instruction. But now. for the first time ever, all of these revolutionary techniques are available to you in this brand-new self-teaching format of easy-to-follow drills and exercises. It has taken four years of careful development, research and testing to arrive at 
v 
VI WHAT BREAKTHROUGH RAMD READING MEANS TO You 
these self-teaching methods which now make it possible for you to learn them at home, in your spare time. You can just imagine what this will mean. Every conceivable subject that has been written about and the whole world of knowledge will lie at your fingertips. And you can do this in just a few short weeks. Undoubtedly you arc aware that you are almost buried, literally, under over one million words, every day of your life. Magazines and newspapers. Study materials. Business correspondence. Reports. Books you want to read—when you gel time. You are practically drowning in an ocean of print. That's because publishing increases yearly and more has been printed in the last ten years than in all of the centuries of printing prior to that time. And it increases daily. But with these new methods you will discover how you can become one of the worlds fastest readers in this sea of words. 
SOME OF THE BREAKTHROUGHS YOU'LL LEARN 
You will discover how to read both smarter and better. Smarter means that you will read as fast as you can think in any material. You will know when to speed up and when to slow down. You will learn all the "tricks" of good readers. You will absorb the information at a rate you never believed possible. And the side effects are tremendous. As an example: You will find out how to remember what you have read. Concentration will become second nature in reading. You will begin to think more clearly, and to organize your daily reading. This will give you much more free time for your outside interests. You will quickly become more interesting to your friends, your family, even to yourself, as you pore over more and more materials. When you follow- the tested and proven method in this book, you will find your mind growing closer to its potential than you ever believed possible. Most important, there are few "practice" reading passages. You immediately begin to apply the techniques in the materials that you need to read. Get started today, and by the end of the week you should be at least 30 percent faster—which means absorbing 40 pages in the time it used to take you to read 30. Without machines or gimmicks of any kind, you will learn to use your own built-in reading pacer. Then you will start using the breakthrough drills which have enabled hundreds of thousands to double and triple their reading rates in just a few short days. You will discover writers' secrets that unveil the writing patterns which will help you to go even faster. You will begin cracking through the most difficult, abstract writing. And you will also discover the many different ways of reading—yes. there are more than the one you already know. Even your attitude can affect your reading rate, and you will discover what you can do about it. Four chapters are devoted to study reading, how to study better and faster with 
WHAT B*FAKTH*OOOH RAPIO READING MEANS TO YOV vli 
all of the latest methods that help many students to get top grades in as little as one-half the time that others spend. Learning to read the newspaper "instantaneously" will allow you to read much more than just one a day. or two magazines a week. The fascinating possibilities—and realities—of reading a book a day are also included. And there's much, much more. 
HOW I BECAME A RAPID READER 
Let me tell you how 1 began reading fast. In 1966. 1 was very worried about my reading assignments in graduate school. Then I saw a television commercial showing a young man running his finger down a page and reading thousands of words per minute. I immediately called to reserve what turned out to be the last seat in a Saturday morning class of an Evelyn Wood Reading Dynamics course. Within just a few weeks this exciting course had helped me to read over five times faster. Keeping up with my reading in school turned out to be incredibly easy. In fact, it was so easy to keep up with my studies that 1 had the time to hold down a full-time job (with the Reading Dynamics organization which I had been invited to join) while also going full-time to graduate school. 1 even had time left over! In 1967 I met Evelyn Wood, a wonderful and dedicated woman who has spent her life trying to help others to enrich their lives through reading. And it was from her that 1 learned that mind organization starts with the ability to absorb printed material rapidly. Within a few short years, 1 had not only taught this amazing skill to the President's staff at the White House, but 1 also had become the National Director of Education for Evelyn Wood Reading Dynamics—at Evelyn Woods personal request. After leaving the Reading Dynamics organization. 1 determined to find a way for people to teach themselves these techniques and thus make them available to the hundreds of thousands who need them so badly but can t afford the expensive classroom instruction. Breakthrough Rapid Reading represents an entirely new self-teaching format, with drills and exercises especially for someone who is working alone. The drills allow you to work both according to your own rate of progress and also according to the amount of time that you have to practice. You will find all of the theories and techniques which are taught in the best rapid reading courses, as well as new ones which 1 have discovered and developed in the course of my own work—to be found nowhere else. For the very first time, the long-guarded secrets of rapid reading are available to everyone. Anyone can take this book and discover the principles and skills essential for becoming an efficient and fast reader. And this book can even be used by graduates of rapid reading courses to continue developing and refining their skills—or to review areas in which they need more work. 
VIII WHAT BFTFAKTHFTOUGH RAPID RC ADI*C MFAN* TO YOU 
Having successfully taught thousands of people of all educational backgrounds to read faster and better, 1 am convinced that there is no better way for anyone to improve his or her reading ability. With this book, you can not only learn these breakthroughs yourself, but you can do it in an
astonishingly brief span of time. The breakthroughs of rapid reading are now in your hands. You are about to change your reading—and, by doing that, your life itself. 
Peter Kump 
CONTENTS 
What Breakthrough Rapid Reading Means to You v 
Chapter One: Save Time by Starting Today 1 Rapid Reading Is a Skill; Successful Skill Learning; A Senior "Student" Makes It; A Good Reader Is a Flexible Reader. What You Can Expect to Learn; How to Get Started; Exercise No. I 
Chapter Two: Tesl Your Reading Rate to Sec Where You Stand 7 Timing Yourself; Testing Yourself; Computing Your Reading Rate; Evaluating Your Retention; Keeping Your Progress Profile; Evaluating Your Present Skills. Be Sure You're Ready to Begin; A Few Words About Your Eyes 
Chapter Three: Start Using Your Built-in Reading Accelerator 15 What Your Eyes Do When You Read; Regressions Slow Your Rate Considerably; What You Should Know About Reading Conditions; Reading Positions; How to Use Your Hand in Reading; Exercise No. 2; Exercise No. 3 
Chapter Four: Eliminate Regressions and Speed Ahead 21 How People Read Fast; The Next Big Step; Eliminating Regressions; Exercise No. 4; Always Use Your Hand; Getting Ahead 
Chapter Five: Build Your Reading Rate Through Drilling 25 The Three Stages of Subvocalizing; Proper Practice Is the Key; How to Learn to Discern Information More Rapidly; Exercise No. 5; Exercise No. 6; Getting Ahead 
Chapter Six: Ask This Simple Question and Start Getting Better Comprehension 29 When You Can't Understand; Paragraphs Hold the First Key to Comprehension; Exercise No. 7; Exercise No. 8; Comprehension Versus Speed; Getting Ahead Practice Drills for Week 2 34 (Supplementary drills to be done with the next six chapters.) 
ix 
X CONTENTS 
Chapter Seven: Don't Read Just for Its Own Sake 39 The First Misconception; The Second Misconception; The Third Misconception; Once Through Is Not Enough; Exercise No. 9; Exercise No. 10; Get Specific with Your Purpose; Know Your Purpose and You Won't Have to Work So Hard; Use These Questions to Start Setting Your Purpose. Set a Purpose for Everything You Read 
Chapter Eight: Become One of the World's Faster Readers! 45 The MSecret" of Speed Reading; A New Drill Can Increase Your Rate Even More; Exercise No. 11; Push Up Even When You're "Reading". Exercise No. 12; It Can Be Easy to Reach Your Goal 
Chapter Nine: Use the Magic Line to Develop Belter Reading Recall 51 The "Acid" Test of Comprehension; The Magic Line; Exercise No. 13; Comprehension Versus Speed; Exercise No. 14; Getting Ahead 
Chapter Ten: Stretch Your Rate Higher with a Different Drill 57 The Range of Efficient Linear Reading; Your Reading Rate Will Vary; The Double/Triple Drill; Exercise No. 15; Reading Versus Practice Reading; Are You Making the Mark?; How to Move Your Hand Faster 
Chapter Eleven: Know Writers* Techniques and Help Yourself 61 The Basic Form of Nonfiction: Exercise No. 16; The Forms of Fiction 
Chapter Twelve: Don't Let Turning Pages Slow You Down 65 "Dusting"; Exercise No. 17; The Glorious Saga of the Windshield Wiper. Solving a Nonreadmg Problem; Turning Pages the Fast Way; Exercise No. 18; Getting Ahead Practice Drills for Week 3 72 (Supplementary drills to be done with the next six chapters.) 
Chapter Thirteen: Make Difficult Reading Easy 77 How Abstract the Writing Is Affects Your Understanding; How People Write and Speak; Levels of Generality; The "Testing" Question; Exercise No. 19; Exercise No. 20 
Chapter Fourteen: How People Read Really Fast 85 Evelyn Wood's Remarkable and Simple Discovery; The Differences Between Slow and Fast Readers; How to See Eye Movements; HowMuch Can the Eyes See?, Why You Can t Understand Lots of Words at a Time; Taking the First Step, Exercise No. 21 
CON'IFNTS XI 
Chapter Fifteen: Learn to Read As Fast As You Think 91 "Reading" at High Rates Feels Different; How to Get Comprehension at Higher Rates; Meaning Isn't Carried by All the Words; You Can Read Out-of-Expectancy Order; Exercise No. 22; Adapt Your Hand Movement to the Paragraph; Exercise No. 23 
Chapter Sixteen: How to Start Gelling Comprehension at High Speeds 99 The Three Rules Which Govern Comprehension. Back to the First Grade: Practice As Much As You Can; Exercise No. 24; Exercise No. 25 
Chapter Seventeen: Read Without Saying Each Word to Yourself—and Soar 105 Be Sure You're Ready to Move Ahead; "Paragraphing": The New Hand Movement; Put Your Earplugs On to Practice: The Two Keys to Successful Practice; Exercise No. 26; You're Your Own Best Bet; Exercise No. 27 
Chapter Eighteen: How Arc You Coming Along? Ill Re-test Yourself; Are You Ready (o Move On?; You Must Evaluate Yourself Practice Drills for Week 4 115 (Supplementary drills to be done with the next six chapters.) 
Chapter Nineteen: Knowing Reading Signals Helps Speed You Up 121 Why Signal Words Help You Understand; The Many Kinds of Transition Words; Exercise No. 28; Exercise No. 29; Exercise No. 30; Faster Reading in Harder Materials; High-Speed Practice Helps Lower-Speed Reading 
Chapter Twenty: There's More Than One Way to ' Read'* 127 Old-Fashioned Speed Reading; Exercise No. 31; Scanning Is Another Reading Alternative; Exercise No. 32; Four Ways of Reading; Leave Your Guilt Behind! 
Chapter Twenty-one: Advance Organizers Can Help Your Comprehension 133 From Whole to Parts; Find the Authors "Map"; Hard Books Are Often the Easiest; Previewing Nonaction; When There Is No Apparent "Map"; Exercise No. 33 
Chapter Twenty-two: Change Your Attitude and Increase Your Speed 141 What a Basketball Experiment Taught Me; How You're Making Progress When Your Rate Stays the Same—Or Even Drops; Remember the Value of Practice Reading; My "Best" Student; Handle Each Day's Practice by Itself; Exercise No. 34 
Chapter Twenty-three: Previewing Fiction Is Always Very Fast 147 Use Scanning to Preview Fiction; Read for Enjoyment; Beware of Reading Problems; Reviewing: The Third Step; Exercise No. 35 
xii CONTENTS 
Chapter Twenty-four: A Dilferent Hand Movement Can Help Your Comprehension 155 The Good Reason for New Hand Movements; The Two Types of Hand Movements; "Underlining" with Two Fingers; The Slashing Hand Movement; The Criss-Crossing Hand Movement; "Criss-Crossing"; Exercise No. 36; And Why Not Straight Down the Page? Practice Drills for Week 5 161 (Supplementary drills to be done with the next six chapters.) 
Chapter Twenty-five: Make Study Reading a Game 169 What's Happening While You're Learning; The Mind Can't Handle Everything That Comes to It; Concentration Is a Trick; The Two Rules of Learning; Ways to Increase Your Concentration; The True Test of Learning; Read Aggressively; "Use" the Information Well; Exercise No. 37 
Chapter Twenty-six: Read with Defined Purposes 175 Reading Purposes Vary Widely; When Your Purpose Is Pleasure; A Stock Broker Finds There's More to It Than Speed Alone; Read Smarter and Faster; Don't Let Chance Determine Your Purpose; Levels of Reading and Learning; How to Define a Purpose WheiTStudying; When You're Not Certain; Draw the Recall Pattern in Advance; Howto Learn the Correct Information; However You Can Learn Most Efficiently Is the Right Way: Exercise No. 38 
Chapter Twenty-seven: "Program" Your Reading to Learn More Efficiently 187 Spend Less Time to Learn More; The Most Efficient Reading; A Plan for Studying; Don't Read to Remember; Exercise No. 39 
Chapter Twenty-eight: Create Visual Patterns to Help Your Recall 193 The Value of a Recall Pattern Versus an Outline; Taking the Second Step; Recall Patterns Can Vary; Exercise No. 40 
Chapter Twenty-nine: Remember More of What You've Read with These Proven Techniques 201 The Three Steps to Improving Your Retention; Organize Creatively; Associate Information Dramatically; Compare and Contrast. More "Recording" Tricks; Exercise No. 41; Now Apply the Techniques for Yourself; A Final Word 
Chapter Thirty: Unravel Difficult Passages This Easy Way 211 When Reading in a New Field; When the Writing Is Abstract; Success Doesn't Always Mean 100 Percent; How Fast Can You Read?; When Reading Test Materials; Exercise No. 42 Practice Drills for Week 6 (Supplementary drills to be done with the next six chapters.) 220 
CONTENTS xiii 
Chapter Thirty-one: Develop High Speeds with These Special Drills 227 It Helps to Be Relaxed: Results Vary with Various Teachers; Is the Glass Half Empty or Half Full?; Exercise No. 43; Exercise No. 44; Practice at Three Times Your Reading Rate 
Chapter Thirty-two: Read Your Newspaper Instantaneously 233 Practice Your New Techniques Where Its Easy; Familiarity Breeds Faster Reading; News Articles Have the Easiest Form of All; A New Way to Read the Newspaper; Narrow Column Hand Movements; Exercise No. 45 
Chapter Thirty-three: Don't Waste Your Time Reading the Mail 239 The First Rule: Handle Everything Only Once; Evaluate a Letters Importance Right Away; Exercise No. 46 
Chapter Thirty-four: Develop the Book-a-Day Habit 249 First Decide What You Want to Read; How to Get More Books Read: A-Book-a-Day Approach; Patrick Buchanan Reads Three Books in Two Flights; The Form of Fiction; A Structural Review of "The Cop and the Anthem"; Exercise No. 47; Names Can Be a Problem; Why Read Novels? 
Chapter Thirty-five: Keep Up with Your Magazines and Informational Reading 255 Use Wisely Whatever Time You Have; Stop Being Compulsive!; When You Find You're Slowing Down; Exercise No. 48; Handle Nonfiction Books the Same Way; Try the Drugstore Drill; Exercise No. 49 
Chapter Thirty-six: Find Out Just How Far You've Come 261 Devise a Six-Month Plan; How Thomas Wolfe Became a Speed Reader; A Few Tips 
Practice Drills for Continuing 264 
How to Maintain a Certain Practice Reading Rate 269 
Index 271 
23 SAVE TIME BY STARTING TODAY People often say that they need a course in rapid reading but they don't have time to take it because of the great amount of reading they already have to do. From the morning newspaper, to combing through endless e-mails, many of us are drowning in information. If too much reading is keeping you from becoming a rapid reader, then maybe you should reconsider. Although initial practice may entail extra lime the first or second week, within two weeks you should be reading fast enough 10 practice not only rapid reading but 10 read or study your required materials as well. So if you don't have the time to do both, then now is the time to learn this time-saving skill. Learning the skills of efficient reading is relatively simple. Just read one chapter of this book at a time, doing ihe short exercises before going on 10 ihe next chapter. This will average about twenly minutes per session, often less time than that After the first six lessons, you will find a special section of drills. These are to be done daily while you are completing the next six lessons. The time you spend on the drills can be varied according to how fast you wish to improve your skills. There are six groups of six lessons, each with its own set of drills. The first week will go very quickly. You'll learn a few things about fast reading, then you'll test your present ability, and you'll learn how to immediately begin improving your reading rate. By the end of this week you'll be reading at least 10 percent faster, perhaps much more. Of course as you learn to read faster, you'll go faster through this book as well. 
RAPID READING IS A SKILL Rapid reading is not a difficult skill to learn. Most of the learning we do as adults is considered conceptual learning that is quite different from developing a skill. Conceptual learning is mainly a process of developing an undmramfing of the subject and can often be done through listening or reading. This is primarily intellectual. In developing a skill, there is also an understanding, but this understanding must be coupled with the praciicc of what you are learning. Sometimes you must practice without an intellectual understanding because that comes only when you can Jo it. There is another difference between learning conceptual subjects and developing a skill. Learning conceptual subjects can sometimes be done very rapidly, especially for adults. But learning a skill, certainly a complex one such as reading, is rarely something 
2 Chapter Three 
that can be acquired immediately. You must master each aspect of the skill before going on to the next. Reading through this book in one evening and just understanding it will not suffice. 
SUCCESSFUL SKILL LEARNING In learning new skills, it is generally best to practice a little bit every day. If you try to learn it all at once you may wind up understanding how it is done but not be able to do it very well. To get the most out of this book and to progress most rapidly 1 suggest that you plan to finish one chapter at a time, ideally one chapter a day. It is often difficult to get started learning a new skill. One tends to put it off until later in the day, especially when you're first learning it. A definite lime each day is imperative. Mornings are usually besi because things have a way of getting put off in the evenings. Before you begin to learn rapid reading decide how much lime you can devote to it each day. If you make it a part of your daily routine, then you will find yourself progressing very quickly. 
A SENIOR "STUDENT'1 MAKES IT Arthur, one of my older students, was a recently retired senior partner of one of Wall Street's most respected brokerage firms. A Yale graduate, this determined individual had decided upon retirement he would take up his education and personal development with the same planning and vigor he had given to his career. He felt that a good reading course would be an excellent beginning and he plunged in with the vitality and optimism of a person one-third his age. There's quite some iruth to the saying about leaching old dogs new tricks, and trying to learn new reading habits after over sixty years of one technique is not easy. But afier a slower than average start, Arthur came through reading more than three times faster with better comprehension. But his own statement that he was now able to get much more reading in. and was using the valuable learning techniques to great advantage. was far more important to me than any statistics. And when he finished, he didn't even feel that it was as difficult as he had anticipated. One word of caution: Do not read through the book planning to come back and do the exercises later because many of the exercises will lose their effect if you know what to expect in advance. Master each concept and drill before moving on 10 the next one. If you do this you most assuredly will improve your reading skills. 
A GOOD READER IS A FLEXIBLE READER Learning to read faster and more efficiently will not simply speed up your rate. You will be learning to read in a completely new way. When people ask me how fast I read 1 am 
S<tvr Time by Starting Today 3 
noi able 10 answer with a single words per minute rate. It's comparable to asking a driver how fast he can drive a car. He might answer that it depends on the condition of the car, the condition of the roads, the weather, the traffic, and his familiarity with the route. It would also depend on how compelling it is to get to his destination. Like this driver, the efficient reader varies his or her rate according to the difficulty of the material, the organization of the reading matter, their familiarity with the subject, and their purpose in reading it. So instead of reading everything the same way, starting at the beginning and going word-by-word straight through to the end. you will learn many different ways to read, and how to adapt each one to meet your specific purpose in reading the material. 
WHAT YOU CAN EXPECT TO LEARN In the most difficult type of reading, technical or study reading, the average student should be able to cut one-third to one-half the time from his or her studying and know the material belter. Professionals or businesspersons should be able to read reports, e-mail, regular mail and professional journals from iwo to four times faster than they do now When you arc just reading for your own pleasure, you should be able to reach rates of five to ten times faster in most novels and easy reading material. You will not just learn to read faster, but also how to read much better. This includes how to get better comprehension when you read, how 10 remember what you read, how to determine your purpose for reading different types of material, and how to concentrate betier. Reading is a tremendously complex skill and there are many newthings to find out about it. Whatever your reading needs, if you apply yourself to the lessons of this book, you will begin 10 improve immediately, and. wiihin six weeks, become not only a fast reader, but an efficient one as well Shern Weisman was a very gifted student who became a very fast reader in a matter of weeks. One day in English class her high school teacher gave the students ihe last 15 minutes to read a chapter in a book that the entire class had been assigned to read. Sherri finished in minutes and had begun something else when her teacher noticed that she wasn't reading the book. When called upon to explain she replied that she had finished. But her teacher refused to believe her and ordered her to the front of the class to tell what the chapter was about. Sherri complied but the teacher was still incredulous. Obviously, according to the teacher. Sherri had read ii before class 
HOW TO GET STARTED The first thing you should do is test yourself and evaluate your reading abilities. This means establishing your beginning reading rate and how much you can retain of what you've read. This will be the topic of the next chapter. First there is a short exercise to complete. 
4 Chapter Three 
After you have done that, there are a few materials to assemble. This first exercise will prepare you for other exercises in the course—and it will take only five minutes at the most. You will need to use your progress profile for the exercise (you'll be using it for many of the exercises and drills in this book) and you will find it at the end of the book 
EXERCISE NO. 1 
Materials: Progress profile at the end of this book. Pen or pencil (Ok if you prefer, use the word processing program on your personal computer. Create a file specifically for this purpose.) 
First Part: If >ou had only six months to live and could read any ten books during that time. what would they be? List as many as you can on the progress profile in three minutes. They need not be books you feel you should read, but rather books you really want to read. 
Second Pare Taking no more than two minutes. list any topic or subject that you would like to learn more about if you had the time. 
Once you have completed this first exercise, you should gather the few materials which you will need for the next chapter. I have found over the years that if students practiced in their own reading materials—materials relevant to them—it becomes much easier to alleviate personal reading problems and progress much faster in the course. You will find all the materials you need in your home or office or certainly no further than the bookstore, newsstand or online sources. The materials are simply books that you might normally read, magazines and newspapers that you subscribe to or read, or printouts from selected online articles. Collect them now and you will then be ready to test yourself tomorrow 
Materials You Will Need for the First Week 1. A pencil or pen. 2. A timing device. Any one of the following will do: a watch or clock with a sweep second hand; a stop watch; a tape recorder; or any timer that will time a one-minute period If you prefer, you can use the clock on your computer. Many feature both digital and the regular clock face screens. 3. A book for testing yourself. This should be a book that you haven't read, preferably on a general subject or perhaps a biography. Try to avoid novels and how-todo-it books; magazines are not usually satisfactory for testing since most articles are not long enough. 
Save Timr by Starring Today 5 
4. Another book of your choice. This may be any book that you might ordinarily read for pleasure It should not be too difficult and it is permissible to use a book youVe read before. 5. Paper, 8 1/2x11 sheets. (Or open a file on your computer to track your speed reading progress.) 
While you are assembling the above items, you should also look for the books you listed in Exercise No. 1. While the exercise assumes that you would have six months to read these books, there's a good chance that you'll be able to read them during the next six weeks. If you don't have these books, then plan to pick them up at your local library, nearest bookstore or order them online. You won't need them all at once, but when you do need them, they should be available. As soon as you have the materials for this week then you are ready to begin the next chapter. If you have already done this, pick a regular daily lime to do the chapters, and then plan to begin at thai time tomorrow. 

23 TEST YOUR READING RATE TO SEE WHERE You STAND Most people feel that they read too slowly—but they have no idea of how fast they really read. Now you will find out how to test your own reading rate, and also how to measure how much you retained of what you read. It tends to be a more accurate selftcst if you use the type of material that you regularly read: e.g., nonaction, texts, business reporis. fiction, etc. If you would like to have a broader picture of your reading skills, then you should plan to test yourself in more than one book In this case, the second book should be a contrast to the first: if the first book is nonfiction. which is preferred, then a novel or biography would be a good second choice. If you test yourself in several books, you may find a variation in your abilities. That's bccausc mosl people arc more knowledgeable in one field than in another, and your reading rate will usually reflect this fact. 
TIMING YOURSELF To test yourself, you will be reading for three minutes, and you must know when the time is up. It is not difficult to time yourself. If you use a stop watch, simply start the watch when it is time to begin, then glance over at it from time to time until the three minutes arc up. If you use a tape recorder, record a three-minute time period in the following manner: 
Record onto the tape: 'Ready? Begin reading" IhenlcayjLa three-minute silcnce. Next record onto the tape. "Stop, pltase" 
If you use a watch or clock with a sweep second hand, simply place the watch or clock where you can see it easily Wait until the second hand is at the "12," then begin your reading. Glance over at it from time to time until the reading time is up. Don't worry if you run slightly over or under the correct amount of time. A few seconds will not make a great difference, and soon you will find u quite easy to do. You might also have a friend time you, but this will not be practical more than a few times. Better still, if you have a PC. use the timer on one of your computer programs. 
8 Chapter Three 
TESTING YOURSELF Oncc you have your test book, pen or pencil, and a timing device, then you are ready to begin. When you are reading to test yourself, try to read as you would normally read material of this nature. Do not lightly skim a textbook as though u were a novel, nor read a novel as though you were studying it for a very comprehensive test. To test yourself, simply follow the steps below: 
Beginning Reading Evaluation Directions: Read through the four steps carefully. When you understand everything, come bach to the first step and begin. 
1. Select a section of your testing book that is about ten pages long and that you have not read. 2. Read as far as you can in the material for three minutes. Use your liming device. 3. At the end of the three minutes, make a pencil or pen mark where you stopped reading, then close the book. 4. Prepare a separate sheet for evaluating your reading retention by numbering from 1-20 down the left. Write down everything you can remember from the reading on this sheet without looking back at the reading selection. If you've created a file on your computer, do the same in your word processing program. You may take up to six minutes; use your timing device. (If using the tape recorder at the end of the three-minute period, prior to the testing, record a six-minute period.) 
Now complete your reading evaluation according 10 the steps above before reading on. 
COMPUTING YOUR READING RATE Getting a words per minute reading rate is really quite easy if you just follow these four steps: First, you must find the average number of words per line in your book. To do this count the number of words in any three full lines and divide the sum by three. For example, if there are 33 words in three full lines, the average would be 11 words per line. WPL. But if there were only 31 or 32 words, you should put the count at ten WPL because it is more accurate to round down in determining your reading rate. Second, count the number of lines that you have read during the time allotted for reading. You will undoubtedly come across some partial lines. In this case count two halves as one line; a single word or two on a line you may simply omit, and if the line is only a word or two short, then count it as a full line. 
Test Your Raiding Rate to See Where You Stand 9 
Third, multiply the number of lines (hat you have read by the average number of words per line. This will give you (he total number of words that you have read. Fourth, divide (he answer in the third step, just above. by the number of minutes used for the reading, in this case three, to find your words per minute rate. The answer will be your reading rate or WPM. 
To Find Your Reading Rate 
1. First find the average number of words per line: (a) WPL 2. Count the total number of lines read: (b) 3. Multiply "a" by "bM for total amount you read: (0 4. Divide "c" by the number of minutes you read: WPM 
In the first class of my courses. I ask everyone to bring an easy book and read for a minute at their very highest rate. It's exceedingly rare for anyone to go over 400 words per minute even though they have no responsibility to the material, no test, report, etc. Obviously they are pushing as hard as they can which is easy to see from the pained expressions on their faces. Within a few lessons this same rate is usually representative of their lowest, study-reading rate, and by the end of the course when we repeat this same "test" everyone is amazed—not so much at how far they've come but that their former top rate now seems so very slow. 
EVALUATING YOUR RETENTION To obtain a beginning evaluation of your retention, count the total number of items listed that you were able to remember on the "Beginning Reading Evaluation." This figure will give you an idea of how much you can remember from the material. In this very informal type of evaluation you have an excellent way of watching your progress. At any point that you wish to find out how well you are doing, you may simply repeat this same test using the same book but a different passage. This test does not attempt to evaluate your comprehension, which is very difficult to do accurately. Most tests of comprehension measure what the test writer wishes to measure, not necessarily what is important to you. Many tests do not even measure what they are intended to measure very well. To evaluate your comprehension, the easiest and best thing to do is simply to read through the material again and note every idea or detail that you feel should be understood 
10 Chapter Three 
and retained. Then chcck your own paper to see if you remembered as much as you feel you should have. Rate yourself as either adequate (good) or needing improvement. Don't be discouraged if you forget a great deal: most people do in the beginning and no one can be expected to remember everything. Your ability to recall the information completely from memory, as you have attempted to do here, is the hardest test of retention. 
KEEPING YOUR PROGRESS PROFILE When you have computed your reading rate and evaluated your retention, record the figures on the progress profile for the appropriate chapter and test If you continue to record all of your rates and scores, you will have a good picture of your progress as you develop your skills. (See worksheets at the end of the book.) 
EVALUATING YOUR PRESENT SKILLS It is always interesting to have an idea of how one's reading relates to others, especially when beginning a rapid reading course. A chart such as the one on page 11 cannot possibly take everything into consideration or be held as very authoritative, but it can give you a good general evaluation. 
BE SURE YOU'RE READY TO BEGIN If you found that your reading rate was under 120 words per minute, you may not be ready to begin this course. Nothing in this book can harm you, but if you arc not ready for a rapid reading course it could be somewhat frustrating. There are many possible reasons why you might not be ready for this course. If you are an adult and your reading rate is less than 120 words per minute, you may be testing yourself with a book that is too difficult. In such a situation, test yourself again in easier material. If you are under fifteen, you might try reading regularly any books or materials that you enjoy, for 50 minutes or more every day. and then retest yourself in one or two months to see if you are ready to begin. If you are reading in a second language and your rate is 150 words per minute or less, you may need to do a lot more reading in the language you wish to read faster, in order to build a larger vocabulary-. If you decide to proceed with this course, then take it very slowly with lots of extra practice and reading. Anne Marie was a very quiet student who began with a double handicap; she was not only a slow reader, but English was her second language. When you're working in a second language it's often quite difficult to get beyond doubling your reading rate. Anne Marie also had rather low comprehension and poor retention or recall. She was a 
Test Your Raiding Rate to See Where You Stand 11 
IF YOUR READING RATF IS: AND YOUR RETENTION IS: Under 120 words per minute You arc a below average reader. Adequate or Needs Improvement: You probably should consult a reading specialist through a local university, school, or reading clinic. If you are under fifteen, you may be able to benefit from this book. A fuller explanation follows this chart. 
120-180 word s per minute Your reading rate is below average unless you arc under sixteen. 
Adequate. One of your biggest problems may be that you do nor read enough. Plan to spend at least thirty minutes extra each day reading in books or magazines which you enjoy Seeds Improvement: In addition to needing extra daily reading time, you should plan to spend at least one hour per day drilling, emphasizing comprehension drills. 
180-210 words per minute: You are an average reader 
Adequate You should benefit a great deal by following this book carefully. Seeds Improvement You should work hard with comprehension and retention drills Extra reading time on a regular dally basis would be of great value, use matenals you enjoy. 
210-350 words per minute: You are reading on an average college level. 
Adequate: With regular practice you should see a quick and large improvement. Needs Improvement You tend to be careless in your reading. probably a result of poor habits. Careful attention to comprehension exercises should help to remedy this. 
350-500 words per minure: You are an above average reader. 
Adequate You should improve quickly. Some initial exercises may appear easy, but do them carefully to insure a good foundation. Seeds Improvement You do nor Jwve good control of your reading. You need to leant when to slow down. Pay special attention to organizing techniques which you may have an impulse to gloss over 
Over 500 words per minute You are a superior reader. 
Adequate. Some of the beginning techniques may slow you down. Be patient and the improvement will soon follow. Seeds Improvement You may have to pay special attention to slowing down and learning how to be careful when it is necessary. As there will be plenty of time to speed up. do not fear a rate decrease initially Pay special attention to learning how to adjust rate to purpose 
12 Chapter Three 
good student who attended all the sessions and did most of the home practice. 1 kept expecting her not to appear, as sometimes happens with students who don't do their practicing (and subsequently feel very guilty) or who experience difficulty at first. But Anne Marie was more determined than 1 could see. At the second to the last session she raised her hand and said she wanted to thank me because though she was just up to 600 words per minute (no modest achievement since she had started at under 200) she had gained immeasurably from the study reading techniques. She said she was finding that not only had she cut her study reading time significantly, but also she knew the material much better and was already getting better test scores at school. Most important to her. she related that never had she felt so confident before. It is most important to understand that to be ready to take a rapid reading course you must be able to already read easily. If you have any question about this, a simple test is to read aloud from a newspaper to someone. If you stumble or have trouble with as many as one out of ten words, then it would be better to seek help from a specialist. Let's assume you are ready to begin. You've found your beginning reading rate, already learned how to compute your rate in words per minute, and have a good idea of how well you retain what you read. So now start to improve on it. 
A FEW WORDS ABOUT YOUR EYES Few people have regular eye examinations. If you experience any visual difficulty or eye strain while reading for more than a few minutes at a time, or if you have not had an eye examination in the last year or two, it would be advisable to do so as soon as possible. This should provide maximum visual efficiency and assure minimum physiological stress. In one set of classes which 1 taught at the Pennsylvania Vision Institute in Pittsburgh, as an experiment, all participants were given a visual examination. Over thirty percent of the class needed some attention. Lenses were advised, at least for reading, if they did not already have them. If they already wore lenses, often an adjustment of the prescription or vision training was suggested. 1 was very surprised as I had never expected such results. If you would like to see a doctor about your eyes but don i know one, consult the local optometric or ophthalmological society or the yellow pages of your phone book or online and call one of these specialists for an appointment. Or consult with your Health Maintenance Organization, or HMO. if you are a member. Most HMOs cover members' vision care. The various professions dealing with the eyes can be confusing. Here's a key to help you thread your way through. 
Test Your Raiding Rate to See Where You Stand 13 
OCULIST: An outdated and infrequently used word which usually means an Ophthalmologist. OPTICIAN: A specialist who makes or sells corrective lenses but is not licensed to prescribe them. OPHTHALMOLOGIST: A physician who specializes in surgery and diseases of the eye. He may prescribe lenses as well as vision training. OPTOMETRIST: A professional specially trained to examine, measure and treat visual defects by means of corrective lenses and other methods such as vision training. While he or she does not operate, in some states they can use drugs for diagnostic as well as therapeutic purposes. 

5 START USING YOUR BUILT-IN READING ACCELERATOR It may surprise you to learn that you already possess the greatest reading accelerator that has yet been discovered: your hand. Hundreds of thousands of dollars have been spent on fancy machines to help speed up reading rates, and even computer software, but none of them has ever begun to equal the human hand. 
WHAT YOUR EYES DO WHEN YOU READ 
Before you learn how to read with your hand, you should know why you read slowly. And first you must know something about how your eyes work when you read. The eyes are constantly moving around in little jerky movements. In order to see something, it is necessary for them to stop and fixate on an object for a brief moment in order to register an impression. It's somewhat like taking a picture with a camera. We have all been taught to read one word at a time, which means a rate of about 240 words per minute. This is because your eyes need a quarter of a second to fixate on an object. Therefore, if you read one word at a time, as you were taught to do, you read one word every quarter of a second. With a little easy arithmetic, that comes to four words per second or a rate of 240 words per minute. 
REGRESSIONS SLOW YOUR RATE CONSIDERABLY 
More than likely, you read fewer than 240 words per minute. The average reader makes many regressions, going back and looking at words, 10 to 11 times for every 100 words read. This means that the average reading rate is about 215 words per minute. There are two kinds of regression, conscious and unconscious. You may sometimes feel that you dtd not understand something particularly well, so you decide to go back and reread it. This is a conscious regression and there is nothing particularly wrong with it. It is not the most efficient way to get the best comprehension, but it is certainly one way. Unconscious regressions exist because poor habits were formed when you first learned to read. They occur when the eyes, unconsciously, go back and look at words. You will learn how to eliminate this habit shortly and immediately increase your reading rate 
15 
16 Chapter Three 
because of it. Even if you arc reading faster than 240 words per minute, you probably make some regressions. Learning to eliminate them is the first step in learning to read faster. 
WHAT YOU SHOULD KNOW ABOUT READING CONDITIONS 
There arc two things you should know about reading conditions: what lighting you should have and the best position, or posture, for reading. Did your mother ever say to you. "There's not enough light there, you 11 ruin your eyes!" when you were absorbed in reading something? Us possible that your mother was mistaken because Americans tend to overhght on the whole. You should have lighting that is neither too bright nor too dim; either one can be a strain on your eyes. The best lighting for reading is diffused lighting, or lighting that comes from several sources and does not create a glare on the page. If you can read the material without any strain, then there is probably enough light. Too much or too little light can cause a strain. A good test is to put your hand about a foot above your reading material. If there is a strong, sharp shadow then the light is too bright. It is preferable to have almost no shadow at all. Small high-intensity lamps are not advisable. 
READING POSITIONS 
Many people will not like to find out that the best position for reading is silting up in a chair with your back firmly against the back of it. Slouching, lying down, and other alternative reading positions are simply not the best way to read. Sometimes correcting your posture is uncomfortable at first, but if you are truly interested in efficiency, then you would do well to make this a permanent habit. 
FIGURE 1 . MOST EFFICIENT REAOING POSTURE 
Scarf fling Your Built-in Reading Accelerator 1 7 
A book is best set at a 45 degree angle to your eyes, as in Figure 1. Set like this, your eyes do not have to readjust their angle of vision constantly. This results in less work for them and therefore makes it less tiring for you. It will make it easier if you take a book or binder two to three inches thick and place it under the book that you are reading. This usually achieves the 45 degree angle that is most comfortable. There is always a student who asks about reading in bed. I usually answer that by pointing out that if you want to learn to read fast, you're interested in efficiency. You can read in bed. of course, but that's not the place to be concerned about your rate. I personally read slowly when I'm in bed because it usually ptits me to sleep. 
HOW TO USE YOUR HAND IN READING 
To use your hand to increase your reading rate, begin by pointing your index finger as in Figure 2. Then run the tip of your finger along each line of print just underneath the words you are reading. As your finger moves along, read above it. When your finger comes to the end of the line, lift it up about half an inch and bring it quickly back to the following line and begin the whole process again. Although this may at first seem a bit awkward, you will quickly get used to it. And almost as soon as you begin using your hand when you read, you will start increasing your rate. That's because it helps you to eliminate unconscious regressions. In fact, doing this alone helps the average person speed up from 10% to 20%. But it will take some practice to achieve that Here are some exercises to help you begin. 
FIGURE 2. USING THE INDEX FINGER AS A READING PACER 
18 Chapter Three 
EXERCISE NO. 2 
Materials: Tins book. 
Purpose: Learn to do the first hand movement smoothly and automatically 
1. Practice doing the first hand movement (underlining with your index finger) for several minutes on ihe passage of nonsense material that follows this exercise. 2. With your index finger extended, move your hand under each line in about one second. Count "one" ot«f loud as you move under each line. 3. Lift your finger at the end of the line and quickly return it. Continue on all of the lines, counting "one" each time. 4. When you finish the section begin it again, continuing until the movement is smooth and automatic, never jerky. You should not have to think of what you arc doing; just be looking at the nonsense words. 
PRACTICE PASSAGE OF NONSENSE MATERIAL 
XXXXXX XXX XXXXX XXXX XXXXXX XXX XXXX XXX XXXXXX XXXX XX BB BBBB BBBBBB BBB BBBB BBB BBBBBB BBBB BBBBBB BBB BBBBBB XXXXXX XXX XXXXX XXXX XXXXXX XXX XXXX XXX XXXXXX XXXX XX BB BBBB BBBBBB BBB BBBB BBB BBBBBB BBBB BBBBBB BBB BBBBBB XXXXXX XXX XXXXX XXXX XXXXXX XXX XXXX XXX XXXXXX XXXX XX BB BBBB BBBBBB BBB BBBB BBB BBBBBB BBBB BBBBBB BBB BBBBBB XXXXXX XXX XXXXX XXXX XXXXXX XXX XXXX XXX XXXXXX XXXX XX BB BBBB BBBBBB BBB BBBB BBB BBBBBB BBBB BBBBBB BBB BBBBBB XXXXXX XXX XXXXX XXXX XXXXXX XXX XXXX XXX XXXXXX XXXX XX BB BBBB BBBBBB BBB BBBB BBB BBBBBB BBBB BBBBBB BBB BBBBBB XXXXXX XXX XXXXX XXXX XXXXXX XXX XXXX XXX XXXXXX XXXX XX BB BBBB BBBBBB BBB BBBB BBB BBBBBB BBBB BBBBBB BBB BBBBBB XXXXXX XXX XXXXX XXXX XXXXXX XXX XXXX XXX XXXXXX XXXX XX BB BBBB BBBBBB BBB BBBB BBB BBBBBB BBBB BBBBBB BBB BBBBBB XXXXXX XXX XXXXX XXXX XXXXXX XXX XXXX XXX XXXXXX XXXX XX BB BBBB BBBBBB BBB BBBB BBB BBBBBB BBBB BBBBBB BBB BBBBBB 
Start Viing Your 